Summarize the following in 5 bullet points.
Title: "How does Starlink Satellite Internet Work?📡☄🖥 - YouTube"
Transcript: "Beaming internet from the middle of the  woods using an extra-large pizza-sized satellite dish placed on top of your house up  to a satellite orbiting 550 kilometers outside Earth’s atmosphere, well let’s be honest, is  technologically mind-blowing. What’s even crazier is that the Starlink satellites move incredibly  fast, around 27,000 kilometers per hour, and data is being sent back and forth between them  at hundreds of megabits per second, all while the dish and satellite are continuously an gling  or steering the beam of data pointed directly between them. On top of that, the dish switches  between different satellites every 4 or so minutes because they move out of the dishes’ field of  view rather quickly. If you have no clue as to how this is possible, stick around because we’re  going to dive into the multiple key technologies which enable satellite internet to magically work. First, we’ll explore inside the satellite dish and see how it generates a beam of data that is able  to reach space. Second, we’ll see how this dish continuously steers the beam so that it points  directly at a satellite moving across the sky. And third, we’ll dive into what exactly the dish and  satellite are sending inside the beam that results in your ability to stream five HD movies or shows  simultaneously. This video is quite long as it’s full of in-depth details. We recommend watching  it first at one point two five times speed, and then a second time at one and a half speed  to understand it as a complete technology. So, stick around, and let’s jump right in. First, let’s start by clarifying the difference between a television satellite dish  such as this one, and the Starlink ground dish, which Elon Musk dubbed Dishy McFlatface or Dishy  for short. TV dishes use a parabolic reflector to focus the electromagnetic waves which are  the TV signals sent from broadcast satellites orbiting the Earth at an altitude of 35 thousand  kilometers. TV satellite dishes only receive TV signals from space, they can’t send data. Dishy, however, both sends and receives internet data from a Starlink satellite orbiting 550  kilometers away. While the Starlink satellite is 60 times closer than TV satellites, it’s still an  incredible distance to wirelessly send a signal, and thus the beams between Dishy and the Starlink  satellite need to be focused into tight powerful beams that are continuously angled or steered to  point at one another. Compare this to TV broadcast signals which come fr om a satellite the size of  a van, and whose signals propagate in a wide fan that covers land masses larger than North  America. Table size Starlink satellites, however, need to be in a low earth orbit  to provide for 20-millisecond latencies, which is critical for smoothly playing internet  games or surfing the web, and as a result, their coverage is much smaller. Thus 10,000 or more  Starlink satellites, all orbiting at incredibly fast speeds in a low earth orbit, are required to  provide sate llite internet to the entire earth. Let’s now open up Dishy McFlatface. At the back,  we have a pair of motors and an ethernet cable that connects to the router. Note that these  motors don’t continuously move Dishy to point directly at the Starlink satellite; they’re used  only for initial setup to get the dish pointed in the proper general direction. Opening up Dishy,  we find an aluminum structural back-plate and on the other side, we find a massive printed circuit  board or PCB. One side has f Dishy. So, what are we looking at? Well, in  essence, we have 1280 antennas arranged in a hexagonal honeycomb pattern, with each stack of  copper circles being a single antenna controlled by the microchips on the PCB. This massive array  works together in what’s called a phased array in order to send and receive electromagnetic  waves that are angled to and from a Starlink satellite orbiting 550 kilometers above. Let’s  zoom in and see how a single antenna operates. Here we have an aperture co ne feed is just a copper PCB trace or wire that abruptly ends  under the antenna stack. We send a 12 Gigahertz high-frequency voltage or signal to the feed  wire which is a voltage that goes up and down in a sinusoidal fashion, going from positive  to negative and back to positive once every 83 pico-seconds, 12 billion times a second, or 12  Gigahertz. Note that high-frequency electricity works differently from direct current or low  frequency 50 or 60-hertz household electricity. For example, a ave a concentration of electrons pushed to the end of the feed wire thus creating a zone of  negative charge which corresponds to the maximum negative voltage. This concentration of electrons  on the tip of the wire repels all electrons away, including the electrons on the top of the patch,  and as a result, these electrons are pushed to the other side of the circular patch. Thus, one  side of the patch becomes positively charged, while the other becomes negatively  charged, thereby creating ele ic fields in the patch will also  oscillate as the electrons, or current, flows back and forth. If we pause the oscillation we can see some of these electric field vectors,  or arrows, from the patch, are vertical, and because they are equal and opposite, they cancel  out. However, other electric fields are horizontal in the same plane of the patch and are called  fringing fields. These fringing fields are in the same direction and thus they add to each other,  resulting in a combined electric f 42  picoseconds later. The charge concentrations, or voltage, as well as the current, is all  flipped, and thus the electric and magnetic fields point in the opposite directions. Electric  and magnetic fields propagate in all directions, and by creating these oscillating fields,  we’ve generated an electromagnetic wave which travels in the direction perpendicular to  both the electric and magnetic field vectors. Because the two sets of field vectors are not  all in the same plane, but rather ar the stack. Which means, if we want to make  these electric and magnetic fields stronger, we just have to increase the voltage sent to the  feedline. It’s like a dimmer on a light switch: more power equals a brighter light. Thus far we’ve been talking about this aperture-coupled patch-antenna as transmitting;  however, it can also be used for receiving a signal. In this microchip, called a front-end  module, we switch the antenna from transmit to receive and turn off the 12 Gigahertz signal.  Wh . First, as seen earlier, this antenna has many more layers and is more  complicated than we’ve discussed. For example, here are two circular patches. The bottom is  used to transmit at 13 Gigahertz while the top to receive at 11.7 Gigahertz. Additionally,  there are two H slots and two feed wires to support circular polarization, a reflective plane  in the back, and also, there are multiple features for isolating the operation of one antenna from  the adjacent antennas. We’ve included these and with  very exact dimensions so that they receive and transmit only a very narrow range of  frequencies, and all the other frequencies outside this range are essentially ignored  by the antenna. Let’s move on and see how a single antenna can be combined with others in  order to amplify the beam to reach outer space. This single antenna is only a centimeter or  so in diameter and using only it would be like turning on and off one light bulb and trying  to see it from the international space statio one antenna generates an electromagnetic wave that propagates outwards in a balloon shape. At every  single point in space, there’s only one electric field vector with a strength and direction and  thus the two antennas’ oscillating electric field vectors combine together at all points in  space. In some areas, the electric fields from the antennas are pointing in the same direction  with overlapping peaks, and thus add together via constructive interference, and in other locations,  they’re op u might be thinking that the strength of 1  antenna duplicated 1280 times over would result in a combined power of, well, 1280 times a single  antenna, but you’d be mistaken. The effective power and range of the main beam from all these  antennas combined is actually closer to 3500 times that of a single antenna. The quick explanation  is that by having these patterns of constructive and destructive interference, it’s as if we  took a single antenna, multiplied it by 1280, and then placed a whol ange  of STEM topics in hands-on, interactive ways, many of which directly relate to Starlink  and other cutting-edge technologies such as electric cars, quantum computers,  rocketry, or neural networks. For example, they have an entire course dedicated  to Waves and Light, and another one on gravitational physics which will greatly help  in understanding Starlink and SpaceX rockets. Brilliant is nothing like a boring textbook,  but rather all the courses use interactive modules to make the less scription to the first 200 people who sign up. Just go to brilliant.org/brancheducation.  You can find that link in the description below. Now let’s continue exploring how a powerful  beam can be continuously swept across the sky, and then how we fill it with hundreds  of megabits of data every second. As a quick refresher from before, here’s  an array of 1280 antennas and we fed them all with the same 12 Gigahertz signal in order to  create a laser-like beam propagating perpendicular to Dishy. other. Understanding phase is critical, so quickly:  changing the height or amplitude of the signal is done by changing the power sent to the  antenna, thus making the signal stronger or weaker. The frequency is how many peaks and  troughs, or wavelengths there are in one second, and changing the phase is shifting the signal left  or right. Phase shifting is measured in degrees between 0 and 359, because, if we shift the signal  360 degrees, or one full wavelength, then we’re back at the beginni se shift the signal sent to  one antenna with respect to the other antenna and, as a result, the timing of the peaks and troughs  emitted from one antenna is different from the other. These peaks and troughs propagate outwards, and the location of the constructive interference is now angled to the left with  destructive interference everywhere else. If we change the phase of the antennas again, the  zone of constructive interference is angled to the right. Therefore, by continuously changing  t ich the wave front  is formed, essentially steering the beam in one direction or another. And, if we bring in  more antennas in a two-dimensional array, we can now steer the beam in any direction  within a one-hundred-degree field of view. Let’s move back to view all 1280 antennas in  Dishy. In order to know the exact angle the beam needs to be pointed or steered, we use the GPS  coordinates of Dishy from this chip over here, along with the orbital position of the Starlink  satellite which is kn the beam can be steered anywhere in a 100-degree field of view. There are a few quick notes. First, the main beam, also called the main lobe looks like this.  However, constructive and destructive interference isn’t perfect, and as a result  there are additional side lobes of lesser power. Third, Mr. McFlatface holds is a single phased  array, however, on the Starlink satellite, there are in fact 4 phased array antennas. Two  are used to communicate with multiple Dishys, and 2 are used to commun technology and the depth of this video click the subscribe button, like  this video, write a comment below, and we’ll be sure to create more videos like this one. The third topic we’re going to dive into is how information gets sent between Dishy and  the Starlink satellite. For example, we’ve talked about high-frequency  sinusoid-shaped electromagnetic waves, but that doesn’t look anything like binary  and even less like your favorite TV show. So, what’s happening? Well, Dishy and the  satelli iagram as shown. Let’s look at the point 011 101  and draw a line from the origin to this point. The distance from the origin is the amplitude  of the signal, and the angle from the positive-X axis is the phase. It’s a bit like using polar  coordinates. 
Thus, for Dishy to send these 6-bits, it transmits a signal with an amplitude  of 59% and a phase shift of 121 degrees. Then, if the next value being sent is 101 000, the  signal switches to an 87% amplitude or brightness, and a 305-degree phase t. Because we’re dealing on the order of pico and nanoseconds, that means that we  can fit 90 million 6-bit groups or symbols, resulting in 540 million bits per second. However,  note that this data transfer is shared between download and upload. Since this particular antenna  can’t transmit and receive data at the same time, about 74 milliseconds of every second is  used to send data from Dishy to the Starlink satellite and 926 milliseconds is used to send  data from the satellite down to Dishy TV show we use the advanced video codec, or h.264 format. You can learn more about that in our  video that explores image compression shown here. I’m sure you have many questions, and by  all means put them in the comments below, but before we finish let’s clarify two things. 
First, the scale of practically everything in this video is off. Here’s the correct scale of Dishy  and the Starlink Satellite, however Dishy is 550 kilometers away which we can’t correctly show. In  stark contrast, the e ionately show Dishy emitting  electromagnetic waves and sending them to the satellite. In reality the satellite dish  is more frequently in receive mode and the steps and physics of receiving an electromagnetic wave  are similar to emitting on"
